## Health data space

A Common European **health** data space, which is essential for advances in preventing, detecting and curing diseases as well as for informed, evidence-based decisions to improve the accessibility, effectiveness and sustainability of the healthcare systems.

 
The current regulatory and research models rely on access to health data, including individual level data from patients. Strengthening and extending the use and re-use of health data is critical for innovation in the healthcare sector. It also helps healthcare authorities to take evidence-based decisions to improve the accessibility, effectiveness and sustainability of the healthcare systems. It also contributes to the competitiveness of the EU’s industry. Better access to health data can significantly support the work of regulatory bodies in the healthcare system, the assessment of medical products and demonstration of their safety and efficacy.

Citizens have the right in particular to access and control their personal health data and to request their portability, but implementation of this right is fragmented. Working towards making sure that every citizen has secure access to their Electronic Health Record (EHR) and can ensure the portability of his/her data – within and across borders – will improve access to and quality of care, cost effectiveness of care delivery and contribute to the modernisation of health systems.

Citizens also need to be reassured that, once they have given consent for their data to be shared, the healthcare systems uses such data in an ethical manner and ensure that the given consent can be withdrawn at any time.

Health is an area where the EU can benefit from the data revolution, increasing the quality of healthcare, while decreasing costs. Progress will often depend on the willingness of Member States and healthcare providers to join forces and find ways to use and combine data, in a manner compliant with the GDPR, under which health data merit specific protection. While the GDPR has created a level playing field for the use of health personal data, fragmentation remains within and between Member States and the governance models for accessing data are diverse. The landscape of digital health services remains fragmented, especially when provided cross-border.

The Commission will:

* Develop sector-specific legislative or non-legislative measures for the European health data space, complementing the horizontal framework of the common data space. Take measures to strengthen citizens’ access to health data and portability of these data and tackle barriers to cross-border provision of digital health services and products. Facilitate the establishment, in accordance with Article 40 of the GDPR, of a Code of Conduct for processing of personal data in health sector. These actions will build upon an ongoing mapping of the use of personal health data in Member States and the results of the Joint Action in the context of the Health programme (2020-2023)65.

* Deploy the data infrastructures, tools and computing capacity for the European health data space, more specifically support the development of national electronic health records (EHRs) and interoperability of health data through the application of the Electronic Health Record Exchange Format. Scale up cross-border exchange of health data; link and use, through secure, federated repositories, specific kinds of health information, such as EHRs, genomic information (for at least 10 million people by 2025), and digital health images, in compliance with the GDPR. Enable the exchange of electronic patient summaries and ePrescriptions between 22 Member States participating in the eHealth Digital Service Infrastructure (eHDSI) by 2022; start cross-border electronic exchanges through eHDSI of medical images, laboratory results and discharge reports and enhance the virtual consultation model and registries of European Reference Networks; support big data projects promoted by the network of regulators. These actions will support prevention, diagnosis and treatment (in particular for cancer, rare diseases and common and complex diseases), research and innovation, policy-making and regulatory activities of Member States in the area of public health.
