A Common European **mobility** data space, to position Europe at the forefront of the development of an intelligent transport system, including connected cars as well as other modes of transport. Such data space will facilitate access, pooling and sharing of data from existing and future transport and mobility databases.

 
quotes:

Transport and mobility are at the forefront of the debate on data sharing, an area where the EU has many assets. This concerns the automotive sector, where connected cars critically depend on data, as well as other transport modes. Digitisation and data in all modes of transport and in logistics will be an essential component of further work on the ‘European Transport System’ and in particular in the upcoming ‘Smart and Sustainable Transport Strategy’ (Q4 2020). This will include actions in all transport sectors as well as for cross- modal data sharing logistics and passengers ecosystems.

Automotive

Today, modern vehicles generate around 25 gigabytes of data every hour and autonomous cars will generate terabytes of data that can be used for innovative mobility-related services and for repair and maintenance services. Innovation in this area requires that car data are shared, in a secure and well-framed way, in line with competition rules amongst many different economic players. The access to in-vehicle data is regulated since 2007 in the EU  

vehicle approval legislation57 to ensure fair access to certain car data by independent repairers. This legislation is now being updated to take into account the increasing use of connectivity (3G-4G, so-called remote diagnostics)58, that the rights and interests of the car-owners generating the data are respected and compliance with data protection rules is ensured.

The full transport system

Passenger transport activity is projected to grow by 35% during 2015-2050. Freight traffic for inland modes is expected to grow faster than for passenger at 53% by 205059. Digitalisation and data play an increasing role in supporting transport sustainability. Several legislative frameworks already contain data-sharing obligations, which establishes a list of datasets (including datasets concerning public transport). Moreover, the Digital Transport and Logistics Forum is working on a concept of ‘federated platforms’ to define what needs to be done at the EU level to facilitate data-sharing/re-use by connecting different public and private platforms. Furthermore, networks of national access points to make data available exist in the Member States where the data are made available with a view to serving road safety, traffic and multi-modal travel information services, with data generated by the public and the private sector. Wide availability and use of data in public transport systems has the potential to make them more efficient, green and customer friendly. Data use to improve transport systems is also a central feature of smart cities.

The Commission will:

-  Review the current EU type approval legislation for motor vehicles (currently focused on wireless data sharing for repair and maintenance), to open it up to more car data based services (Q1 2021). The review will inter alia look at how data is made accessible by the car manufacturer, what procedures are necessary to obtain it in full compliance with data protection rules and the role and rights of the car owner.
    
-  Review the Directive on harmonised river information services60 and the Directive on Intelligent Transport Systems61, including its delegated regulations to further contribute to data availability, reuse and interoperability (both in 2021) and establish a stronger coordination mechanism to federate the National Access Points established under the ITS Directive through a EU wide CEF Programme Support Action (2020).
    
-  Amend the proposal for a Regulation on the Single European Sky62 to include new provisions on data availability and market access of data service providers in order to promote the digitalisation and automation of air traffic management (2020). This will improve safety, efficiency and capacity in air traffic.

-  Review the regulatory framework for interoperable data-sharing in rail transport in 2022.
    
-  Establish common data sets as foreseen in the Regulation on Maritime Single Window63 and, subject to its final adoption, in the Regulation on electronic freight transport information regulations64 (the first such act to be adopted by Q3 2021 and Q4 2022 respectively) to facilitate digital exchange and data reuse between businesses and administration.



